docs: how to setup the usage tracker for cost attribution (#4934)
grafana/tempo: docs/sources/tempo/configuration/usage-tracker.md

---
title: Usage tracker
description: Learn how to configure the usage tracker for cost attribution.
weight: 700
aliases:
- /docs/tempo/configuration/usage-tracker   
---

# Usage tracker

> The usage tracker is a feature that accurately tracks the amount of ingested traffic using a set of custom labels on a per-tenant basis, providing fine-grained control over your data.
> 
> This feature has to be enabled first in the [distributor](https://grafana.com/docs/tempo/<TEMPO_VERSION>/configuration/#distributor):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The usage tracker accurately tracks the amount of ingested traffic using a set of custom labels on a per-tenant basis, providing fine-grained control over your data.

To use this feature, you need to enable it in the [distributor](https://grafana.com/docs/tempo/<TEMPO_VERSION>/configuration/#distributor):
```

```
 usage:
        cost_attribution:
            # Enables the "cost-attribution" usage tracker. Per-tenant attributes are configured in overrides.

>             [enabled: <boolean> | default = false]

Reviewer: What do you think about moving the example above to the introduction and changing this procedural example to be more like what someone would include in their actual config? This example is from lines 193-196 in `manifest.md`: 

```
distributor:
    usage:
        cost_attribution:
            max_cardinality: 10000
            stale_duration: 15m0s
```

Reviewer: If you choose to use the above example, then we should explain what the configuration options impact.

Author: I have used a more concrete example. I think using all the options is not needed. We can left them with their default values

Reviewer: Okay, I think the easiest way to get around this is to include the entire configuration example from the configuration.md file. That way people have the options and the explanation. I'll create a suggestion doing that.

---
title: Usage tracker
description: Learn how to configure the usage tracker for cost attribution.
weight: 700
aliases:
- /docs/tempo/configuration/usage-tracker   
---

# Usage tracker

> The usage tracker accurately tracks the amount of ingested traffic using a set of custom labels on a per-tenant basis, providing fine-grained control over your data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The usage tracker accurately tracks the amount of ingested traffic using a set of custom labels on a per-tenant basis, providing fine-grained control over your data.

Use the `cost_attributes` option to configure usage trackers in the distributor, which expose metrics of ingested traffic grouped by configurable attributes exposed on `/usage_metrics`.

```

## Enable the usage tracker

To use this feature, you need to enable it in the [distributor](https://grafana.com/docs/tempo/<TEMPO_VERSION>/configuration/#distributor) and configure the overrides to handle the data. 

1. Open your configuration file, for example, `tempo.yaml`. 

> 1. In the `#distributor` section, locate the `cost_attribution` line. If it is not present, then copy and paste the example below into your distributor section. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In the `#distributor` section, locate the `cost_attribution` line. If it is not present, then copy and paste the example below into your distributor section and update the options. 
```

```
 usage:
        cost_attribution:
            # Enables the "cost-attribution" usage tracker. Per-tenant attributes are configured in overrides.

>             [enabled: <boolean> | default = false]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            [enabled: <boolean> | default = false]
            # Maximum number of series per tenant.
            [max_cardinality: <int> | default = 10000]
            # Interval after which a series is considered stale and will be deleted from the registry.
            # Once a metrics series is deleted, it won't be emitted anymore, keeping active series low.
            [stale_duration: <duration> | default = 15m0s]
```
